<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Appendix C</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="chapter-15" id="appendix-15-c" epub:type="appendix">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Appendix C</h3>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">The Blaine Campaign</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>In <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The House of Harper</i>, written by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Henry Harper, the following passage occurs: “Curtis returned from the convention in company with young Theodore Roosevelt and they discussed the situation thoroughly on their trip to New York and came to the conclusion that it would be very difficult to consistently support Blaine. Roosevelt, however, had a conference afterward with Senator Lodge and eventually fell in line behind Blaine. Curtis came to our office and found that we were unanimously opposed to the support of Blaine, and with a hearty goodwill he trained his editorial guns on the ‘Plumed Knight’ of Mulligan letter fame. His work was as effective and deadly as any fight he ever conducted in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Weekly</i>.” This statement has no foundation whatever in fact. I did not return from the convention in company with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Curtis. He went back to New York from the convention, whereas I went to my ranch in North Dakota. No such conversation as that ever took place between me and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Curtis. In my presence, in speaking to a number of men at the time in Chicago, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Curtis said: “You younger men can, if you think right, refuse to support <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Blaine, but I am too old a Republican, and have too long been associated with the party, to break with it now.” Not only did I never entertain after the convention, but I never during the convention or at any other time, entertained the intention alleged in the quotation in question. I discussed the whole situation with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lodge before going to the convention, and we had made up our minds that if the nomination of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Blaine was fairly made we would with equal good faith support him.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
